---
title: Reheat Rankine Cycle
sidebar:
  order: 14
slug: engineering-thermodynamics/reheat-rankine-cycle
prev: true
next: true
---

In this episode, we are getting a step closer to the operation of a real steam power plant by learning reheating with multi-stage  As the starting point, let us first recall from the episode 1, the advantages, the superheating broad into the ranking cycle. Compare to the ranking cycle without superheating, that is, the heating process stops here and then expansion process happens through this wet paper region. Compare to that side,  the ranking cycle with superheat increase the thermal efficiency and also increase the work output and also it improved the turbine durability. If superheating was not employed then the TS diagram should look like this ideal ranking cycle. Then the average temperature of heat transfer might be somewhere around here.  Also the condition of steam at the turbine exit is somewhere here. It has a low-driiness fraction that means it has more moisture. When the superheating is employed, the condition of the steam at the exit has substantially improved. Now it is in this stage. You can say the dryness fraction has increased that means the percentage of wet vapor has decreased. You already learn  The kind of failure that happens to turbine blades when moisture is going through the turbine water droplet erosion. It's a significant problem to overcome that one. We had to increase the dryness fraction and with superheat, dryness fraction or the condition of the steam at the turbine exit has improved. Also the average temperature of heat transfer has also increased with superheat.  Because of that temperature increase, efficiency of the cycle also increases. Also you can see from this T.S. diagram that the quantity of heat transfer has also increased with the super heating, consequently the work output has also increased. So ranking cycle with super heat produces more work output as well.  Reheatting further enhances the same advantages that the superheating brought into the ranking cycle. However, it needs some changes to the turbine or some changes to the expansion process. In this simple superheat entire expansion process takes place through a single turbine. In reheat cycle,  Instead of having a single turbine, you split the expansion process of steam into multi-perter binds, having different inlet pressures. That can be schematically shown like this. Superheated steam is coming from here and it is going into the high pressure stage turbine. And steam leaves at state 4 and then it is going through a preheat coil.  After reheating that is after absorbing more heat, steam is going into the low pressure stage of the turbine and then at the exit of the low pressure stage of the turbine, steam is going into the condenser. This is the modification to simple superheat cycle. So you split the expansion into two steps and reheat steam in between.  We can schematically draw the process diagram on the TS curve. This line represents the pressure of the lower pressure turbine or rather inlet pressure of the lower pressure turbine. This is state 4 in isentropic expansion. From 3 to 4 it is isentropic expansion. The process looks like this.  to fire is the reheating process and 5 to 6 it is the expansion through the low pressure turbine stage. For the simplicity here I have considered both stages as isentropic expansion. As you can see condition of the steam at the exit of the low pressure turbine has further improved that means the dryness fraction has further increase.  That means much drier steam. In fact, the superheated steam is going through the turbine, which is much safer for the turbine. Also, you can see the average temperature of heat transfer has further increased reserting in increase of the thermal efficiency of the cycle. Theoretically, by increasing the number of reheating cycles, you can increase the average temperature  of heat transfer that will result in increasing the thermal efficiency of the cycle. However, practically that is not economical. Therefore, in practice you have either 1 or 2 reheating processes. If you have 1 reheating process like in this case, you split the expansion into 2 stages, high pressure, stage and then low pressure.  stage and you have reheating in B-PV. If you employ two stages of reheating then you split your expansion process into three stages. High pressure, intermediate pressure and then low pressure. For example this is a three stage expansion turbine. Here you have the high pressure stage then you have the intermediate precise stage then you have here the low pressure.  stage of expansion. If you look at this turbine arrangement, I am sure you have got several questions in your head. Number one is the size. High pressure stage of the turbine is the smallest. And then intermediate pressure stage turbine is bigger than the high pressure, but still it is much smaller than the low pressure. The low pressure stage of turbines are the biggest.  And also you can see the shape. Why it has this type of a shape? And here you can see there are two stages of low pressure turbine, but there is no reheating in between what it has done is expansion process to the low pressure stages has been split into two. As I saw in the technical specification, they allow up to 405 stages of low pressure  But there is no reheating in between reheating is there between the high pressure turbine and intermediate stage pressure turbine as well as between intermediate pressure and low pressure stage turbines. So you have two stages of reheating having three stages of expansion. So there are many things we have to discuss like I mentioned before.  the size is different, why the shape is different and also how the enthalpy is converted to mechanical energy in a turbine. What are the practical operating conditions of turbine, etc. Rather than presenting all these to you in a single way communication, I prefer to have a kind of a discussion. So we will talk about those things in the lecture in the form of a discussion where you also can  take part in the discussion expressing your opinions and your views based on the theoretical knowledge that you have so far.  Now I have drawn the TS diagram of 2 stage expansion here. You have to sketch the TS diagram of a steam power plant having 3 stages of expansion with 3 stages of expansion mean 2 stages of reheat. You have to see the idea operating conditions. Post the video and try this exercise before moving forward.  Let's try an example to practice. Here there is a steam power plant that produces a net power output of 100 mAh. And the boiler pressure is given as 50 bar and the inlet condition to the high pressure turbine is 500 degree Celsius. That means it is 50 bar and 500 degree Celsius. It is a 2-stage expansion  across the first stage that is a high pressure stage steam expands until pressure drops to 10 bar and then it is reheated back to the original temperature which is 500 degree Celsius usually this is the case when you are reheating you reheat up to O maybe close to the initial temperature in certain cases it is slightly above or slightly less or maybe the same in this case it is the  same temperature of 500 degree Celsius and then it enters the low pressure stage across the low pressure stage it is expanding until the condenser pressure and steam leaves the condenser as saturated liquid at this pressure. The isentropic efficiency is a given, isentropic efficiency of the high pressure stage is 80 percent that of the low pressure stage is 75 percent.  and the isentropic efficiency of the feed water pump is 95%. With suitable assumptions that means we assume there are no pressure losses across the boiler as well as across the condenser. And also we can assume expansion stages are the deabatic. We have to find out the condition of steam at the exit of the low pressure stage of the turbine that is where the  superheated dough with paper and also the thermal efficiency of the cycle and the mass flow rate. The mass flow rate required to produce 100 megawatt net output from the power plant. This is the schematic diagram of the power plant. You have the condenser here pump is there boiler and the reheater high pressure stage turbine and the low pressure  the pressure stage of the turbine. Boiler is operating at 50 bar. Let us sketch the process on a T s diagram. These are the constant pressure lines 50 bar line 10 bar line and 0.05 bar line. Boiler pressure or the pressure of the inlet of the high pressure stage pressure of the inlet of the  the mid low pressure stage and this is the condensed pressure and the exit of the low pressure stage. Let us draw the T s diagram for the ideal situation. That means expansion and compression are also isentropic. This is the T s diagram. These are the states state 1, state 2s, 2s,  stand for the isentropic compression position. Here stage 3 states 4 is that is the isentropic expansion, state 5 and state 6, which is the isentropic expansion position. All these state numbers corresponding to the numbers appearing on this schematic diagram. So you can easily map the 2. Since the real operation is not isentropic through the pump  as well as through the turbine we can sketch the real operation as well. This is the irreversible expansion due to irreversibilities entropy generates therefore actual state 4 lies to the right of isentropic state 4 and here also actual state 6 lies to the right of the isentropic state 6s. Similarly the case is the same here  for the pump as well. Now this is only a guess. You might market outside which is in the superheater region or maybe you can market for the inside the wet paper region. It is absolutely fine. Once you do the analysis you will find out exactly whether this point is inside the wet paper region or whether it is in the superheater region. In order to find answers to all the questions  First thing is we need to identify who we need to find out the properties of each of these states. Let us start with state 3 which is easy to find out. This is 50 bar and 500 degree Celsius. From the super heater steam tables you can find in thalp is 3433 kilo joules per kilogram and the entropy is this much.  Since 3 to 4s is isentropic expansion entropy at 4s is equal to the entropy at 3. Therefore, entropy at 4s is also 6.975. Now, we need to find out what is the enthalpy at 4s. If you look at this entropy here and the saturated  vapor entropy at 10 bar. If you compare these two you can see entropy at 4s is bigger than the saturated vapor entropy. That means 4s lies in the superheated region. Therefore we had to refer the superheated vapor table. Once you go along the superheated table you will see the most adjacent value for 6.97  the N5 entropy R 6.926 and 7.124 at pressure 10 bar. Therefore, our entropy lies in between and the corresponding enthalpy values are 2944 and 3552. From linear interpolation, then we can find out the enthalpy corresponding to this entropy values 2974.7  kilojoules per kilogram. That is 4s. Now we need to find out the enthalpy at 4. We are given the isentropic efficiency of the turbine, then we can apply that equation. Actual work output which is H3 minus H4 divided by the isentropic work output which is H3 minus H4S is equal to H4S.  centropic efficiency which is 0.8. The only unknown value here is h 4 by substituting into this equation the other parameters you can find h 4 is 363.2 kilo joules per kilo gr. Then we can find out h 5 straight away from the steam table 10 bar 500 degree Celsius superheated region because at 500 degree Celsius  at 10 bar steam is in the super heater region. Therefore, you can directly get these two values from the super heater steam tables enthalpy and the entropy. As in the previous case expansion 5 to 6 is isentropic expansion therefore, entropy at 5 is equal entropy at 6s which is 7.6  Then we have to identify whether 6s lies inside the wet paper region or inside the superheated region because without that we can't find out the entire piece. Again our key is the entropy. Entropy of saturated vapor at 0.05 bar is 8.394 kilojoules per hour.  kilogram per kelvin. Our entropy value is less than this one. Therefore, obviously 6S lies inside the wet vapor richer. Therefore, the way we have marked is correct in our sketch. Even if it is wrong, it is not a problem. The important thing is the value. Since this is wet vapor, you have to find out the dryness fraction. Dryness fraction will compute to 0.9.  to 0 0. Based on the dryness fraction you can find out what is the enthalpy at 6S which comes as 2,367.2 kilojoules per kilo term. Now again we can apply the isentropic efficiency equation in order to find out the enthalpy at 6. You will get the enthalpy at 6S 2006.  kilo drop. Since the exit of the condenser is saturated liquid enthalpy at 1 is enthalpy of saturated liquid at 0.05 bar which is 138 kilo joules per kilo drop. The only unknown yet is enthalpy at 2. enthalpy at 2 is is enthalpy at 1 plus the pump  you can find out the isentropic pump work by the temperature difference then you can use the isentropic efficiency equation for the pump then you can find out the actual work input required for the pump. enthalpy at state 2 is enthalpy at 1 plus the actual work input therefore enthalpy at h 2  as 143.3. Now we have found out all the necessary parameters for us to continue along the question. The first question is condition of the exit of the low pressure stage turbine. Here we have the key. The enthalpy is 2645.  0.05 bar is 250061 that you can take from steam tables. The enthalpy at 6 is greater than the enthalpy of saturated vapor at 0.05 bar. Therefore, state 6 is in the superheated region. So, answer for the first question.  is found out. Condition of steam at the exit of the low pressure stages at Superheater Pre-Generes. Therefore, it is Superheater steam. Next is the thermal efficiency. Thermal efficiency is the network output of the plant divided by the heat input. There are two places where the work is produced. One is at the high pressure stage of the turbine.  at the low pressure stage of the turbine. Work output of the high pressure stage is enthalpy at 3 minus enthalpy at 4. Similarly, work output at the low pressure stage is enthalpy at 5 minus enthalpy at 6. Work input is the pump work input that we have already calculated. Alternatively, you can find it from H2 minus H1.  So take place at two places initial heating which is in the boiler that heat transfer is equal enthalpy at 3 minus enthalpy at 2. Then the heat transfer in the reheater which is enthalpy at 5 minus enthalpy at 4. Therefore you will get efficiency is 32.33%. Final what is finding the mass  The power output divided by the network output of the plant. Power output is given 100 megawatts and the network output we have already calculated here in the efficiency calculation and you can put the same values there. The new will get.  second in order to produce 100 megawatt of power output from the plant. We can find out additional information if required for example the temperature at state 6. You know the enthalpy here and you know it is in the super heater region. Therefore you can find out from interpolation what is the temperature here. Also you can find out  what is the heat transfer to the condensed cooling medium that is the enthalpy at 6 minus enthalpy at 1. I believe this worked example help you to find out how to do the performance analysis using thermodynamic properties. I strongly encourage you to replay this video as many times as you want and then understand this completely. With that, I conclude this video lesson and here we talk about  ranking cycle with reheat and with multi-stage expansion and also we learn how to do a performance analysis.
