---
title: Multimedia
sidebar:
  order: 34
slug: data-communication-and-networking/multimedia
prev: true
next: false
---



An integration of text, graphics, still and moving images, animation,
sounds, or any others.

### Characteristics
- Digital – key concept
- Integration of multiple media types, usually including video or/and audio
- Can be interactive or non-interactive

## Types

- Text
- Graphics
- Image
- Video and animation
- Sound

### Captured media

Information captured from the real world. Example: still image, video, audio.

### Synthesized media

Information synthesized by the computer.

### Discrete media

Has no time component.

### Continuous media
Time-based.

## Classification

### Text
Can either be plain text or rich text.

### Graphics

Revisable document that retains structural information. Consists of objects such as lines, curves, circles, etc. Usually generated by software.

### Image

2D matrix consisting of pixels. The smallest element of resolution of the image is called a pixel. One pixel is represented by a number of bits aka pixel depth.

Have no structural information
Two categories: scanned vs. synthesized still
imageExamples of images

### Video and Animation

Both images and graphics can be displayed as a succession of views which create an impression of movement.

Video is moving images or moving pictures. Captured or synthesized. Consists of a series of bitmap images. Each image is called a frame. Speed of video is frame rate and measured in frames per second.

Animation is moving graphics. Generated by computer program. Consists of a set of objects. Object may move and change over time.

### Sound
1D time-based signal. Can be either speech or non-speech. Can be either captured or synthesized.

## Multimedia Networking

Audio and video can be streamed live or from storage.

Stored video/audio streaming can support pause, rewind, fast forward.

Live video/audio streaming can support pause and rewind but not fast forward.

Real-time video/audio streaming must have lower latency.
